AMERICAN SOCICN OGITCAL ASSOCUTION
"E Pluribus Unum" and the Cultures of Democracy

Author(s): H. M. Kallen

Source: The Journal of Educational Sociology , Feb., 1943, Vol. 16, No. 6, United We'll
Stand (Feb., 1943), pp. 329-332

Published by: American Sociological Association

<newpage>“E PLURIBUS UNUM” AND THE CULTURES
OF DEMOCRACY

H. M. KALLEN

There is an issue of human relations which is as old as mankind
and as inveterate as thought. Philosophers call it “the problem of the
One and the Many” and find it also the basic problem of existence.
Humanly, however, it is the problem of how people who are differ-
ent from each other shall live together with each other. It is the
critical problem of each personal life, of each race, sect, sex, occupa-
tional group, political party, sovereign state, and religious establish-
ment.

The history of mankind indicates two major ways of solving this
problem, ways that recur, with variations, in philosophy and the
other arts and sciences as well as in more “practical” affairs.

The first and by far the older and more prevalent way is to deny
all rights to the different. Some primitives utterly extirpate the
different; others make them one with themselves by eating them;
others by attaching their heads or scalps to their own persons or
possessions; still others by degrading the different to slavery—in
Aristotle’s words, to the status of a tool with life in it. More advanced
societies have employed enslavement more than slaughter, though
they have always countered disobedience or nonconformity with the
threat of death. Their elite have been conquerors; their ideal has
been total unity achieved by warfare and imposed by victory, a unity
in which every part draws its existence, its meaning, and its value
from the one absolute, indivisible sovereign whole. Under this unity,
that only can be true which the sovereign says is true—the different

H. M. Kallen is Professor of Philosophy and Psychology and lecturer on the philosophy
of education in the Graduate Faculty of Political and Social Science of the New School for
Social Research. He is author of a number of volumes including Culture and Democracy in
the United States which first brought the concept of cultural pluralism into public discussion.
Dr. Kallen was closely associated with the late William James who left his unfinished work
for Dr. Kallen to edit.
